# imp-interpreter

Interpreter for the IMP programming language

## IMPI 2.0

This version implements the same features, I just got tired of the disgusting parser for the first version. It uses error productions to improve error messages and its parser is slightly less terrible.

IMPI 2.0 can be compiled in the directory `imp2` with `javac imp2/*.java` and executed by `java imp2.Imp`, followed by the program arguments.

It features a debugger (`-d` or `--debug` when executing the interpreter), and it allows multiline input (`-m` or `--multiline`), where the input must be terminated by a `!`.

The original version is still in this repository, but it's very bad, don't use it please.

## Grammar

The following is the grammar of IMP used for this interpreter, specified in EBNF:

    <S>        <= <Stm> | <ProcDef> | <BExp> | <AExp>
    <Stm>      <= <Single> | <Assign> | <If> | <While> | <Scope> | <Seq> | <Nd> | <Call>
    
    <ProcDef>  <= 'procedure' <Id> '(' [ { <Id> ',' } <Id> ] ; [ { <Id> ',' } <Id> ] ')' 'begin' <Stm> 'end'
    
    <Single>   <= 'abort' | 'print' | 'skip'
    <Assign>   <= <Id> ':=' <AExp>
    <If>       <= 'if' <BExp> 'then' <Stm> [ 'else' <Stm> ] 'end'
    <While>    <= 'while' <BExp> 'do' <Stm> 'end'
    <Scope>    <= 'var' <Assign> 'in' <Stm> 'end'
    <Seq>      <= '(' <Stm> ';' <Stm> { ';' <Stm> } ')' | <Stm> { ';' <Stm> } [;]
    <Nd>       <= <Stm> '|' <Stm> { '|' <Stm> }
    <Call>     <= <Id> '(' [ { <AExp> ',' } <AExp> ] ';' [ { <Id> ',' } <Id> ] ')'
    
    <BExp>     <= 'true' | 'false' | '(' <BExp> ('and' | 'or') <BExp> ')' | 'not' <BExp> | <AExp> ('<'|'<='|'>'|'>='|'='|'#') <AExp>
    <AExp>     <= <Id> | <Num> | <AExp> ('+'|'-'|'*') <AExp>
    
    <Id>       <= <Letter> { <Letter> | <Num> }  # where this isn't a keyword
    <Num>      <= <Digit> { <Digit> }

## Execution

IMPI 2.0 allows the user to directly enter commands in the command line, and to execute IMP programs using `:l <filename>` or `:load <filename>`.

It is possible to enter arithmetic or boolean expressions which are then evaluated and the result printed to the console.

`:q` (`:quit`) exits the shell, `:c` (`:clear`) clears the screen.

## The Language

I extended the language by an additional command `print` which prints the program state (the values held by all defined variables). Variables which haven't been assigned a value yet are not printed, and their default value is 0, in line with the lecture's definition of variables. In the spirit of the idea that expressions don't cause side-effects, using an unassigned variable in an expression will not add it to the program state.

All extensions and syntactic sugar discussed in the lecture slides released so far have been added to the language (except for parallelism). This includes `abort` (which doesn't exit the shell, it only aborts the currently running list of commands!), `true`, `false`, omission of the `else` clause in an `if` statement, nondeterministic execution, variable scope as well as procedures.

The parser is relatively lax when it comes to sequences of instructions: They need to be separated by a semicolon, and they can be surrounded by parentheses (but don't have to be), and the last instruction can be terminated by a semicolon (but it doesn't have to be if the instruction sequence isn't surrounded by parentheses).

## Examples

### Factorial

This program defines a factorial function, calls it with argument 5 and then prints the program state.

    procedure fac(n; res)
    begin
        if n <= 1 then
            res := 1
        else
            fac ((n-1); res);
            res := (n * res)
        end
    end;
    
    fac(5; n);
    print
    
The output generated by this program is:

    Program State
      n -> 120

### Primes

The following functions (as defined in imp2/example.imp) are used to find prime numbers and print them using `print`. Note that these functions are very clumsy, as IMP neither knows arrays (for e.g. implementing the [Sieve of Erathostenes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sieve_of_Eratosthenes)) nor division.

	procedure divides(a, div; res) begin
		d := div;
		while d < a do
			d := (d + div)
		end;
		if d = a then
			res := 1
		else
			res := 0
		end
	end;

	procedure isPrime(a; res) begin
		c := 2;
		res := 1;
		while c < a do
			divides(a, c; d);
			if d = 1 then
				res := 0;
				c := a
			end;
			c := (c + 1)
		end
	end;

	procedure findPrimes(c;) begin
		a := 2;
		while c > 0 do
			isPrime(a; p);
			if p = 1 then
				print;
				c := (c - 1)
			end;
			a := (a + 1)
		end
	end
    
Calling `findPrimes(10;)` will create the following output:

    Program State
      p -> 1
      a -> 2
      c -> 10
    Program State
      p -> 1
      a -> 3
      c -> 9
    Program State
      p -> 1
      a -> 5
      c -> 8
    Program State
      p -> 1
      a -> 7
      c -> 7
    Program State
      p -> 1
      a -> 11
      c -> 6
    Program State
      p -> 1
      a -> 13
      c -> 5
    Program State
      p -> 1
      a -> 17
      c -> 4
    Program State
      p -> 1
      a -> 19
      c -> 3
    Program State
      p -> 1
      a -> 23
      c -> 2
    Program State
      p -> 1
      a -> 29
      c -> 1
